Tutorial (#100)
farao-community/farao-community.github.io: pages/docs/tutorials/run-rao.md

---
layout: documentation
title: Tutorial
permalink: /docs/tutorials/
hide: true
root-page: Documentation
docu-section: none
docu-parent: none
order: 5
tags: [ Docs, Tutorial ]
summary-hmax: 0
---

> 

Reviewer: add a summary of the contents (look at other pages to see how)

# Run a RAO without importing a CRAC file

In this tutorial, we will see how to run a simple RAO from a network file and a CRAC. The CRAC will be created from
scratch using the Java API so there is no need to import a CRAC file.

## Set-up

For this tutorial, we'll need Java 17 and we'll create a new project called `org.example` and work on its `Main` class.
For everything to work properly, you also need to install the latest versions
of [PowSyBl core](https://github.com/powsybl/powsybl-core)

> and [PowSyBl Open Rao](https://github.com/powsybl/powsybl-open-rao).

Reviewer: and OLF. add a Maven pom.xml example

##L
BBE1AA1  BBE2AA1  1 0 0.0000 10.000 0.000000   5000
BBE1AA1  BBE3AA1  1 0 0.0000 10.000 0.000000   5000
FFR1AA1  FFR2AA1  1 0 0.0000 10.000 0.000000   5000
FFR1AA1  FFR3AA1  1 0 0.0000 10.000 0.000000   5000
FFR2AA1  FFR3AA1  1 0 0.0000 10.000 0.000000   5000
DDE1AA1  DDE2AA1  1 0 0.0000 10.000 0.000000   5000
DDE1AA1  DDE3AA1  1 0 0.0000 10.000 0.000000   5000
DDE2AA1  DDE3AA1  1 0 0.0000 10.000 0.000000   5000
NNL1AA1  NNL2AA1  1 0 0.0000 10.000 0.000000   5000
NNL1AA1  NNL3AA1  1 0 0.0000 10.000 0.000000   5000
NNL2AA1  NNL3AA1  1 0 0.0000 10.000 0.000000   5000
FFR2AA1  DDE3AA1  1 0 0.0000 10.000 0.000000   5000
DDE2AA1  NNL3AA1  1 0 0.0000 10.000 0.000000   5000
NNL2AA1  BBE3AA1  1 0 0.0000 10.000 0.000000   5000
BBE2AA1  FFR3AA1  1 0 0.0000 10.000 0.000000   5000
##T
BBE2AA1  BBE3AA1  1 0 400.0 400.0 1000. 0.0000 10.000 0.000000 0.0	     5000 PST
##R
BBE2AA1  BBE3AA1  1                    -0.68 90.00 16 0         SYMM

```

Copy and paste the network data in a file named `12Nodes.uct` that you shall store in the resources directory of the
project. The network can be imported using [PowSyBl](https://www.powsybl.org/index.html):

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```java
```

String networkFilename = "12Nodes.uct";
Network network = Network.read(networkFilename, Main.class.getResourceAsStream("/%s".formatted(networkFilename)));
```

## Create CRAC

The [CRAC](/docs/input-data/crac/crac) is the data object that contains all the key information for the RAO, i.e. the
contingencies to simulate, the CNECs to optimise and the remedial actions to apply. The RAO's Java API allows users to
manually fill the CRAC with all the required and desired data.

The first step is to instantiate the CRAC using a `CracImpl` object:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```java
```

> CracImpl crac = new CracImpl("crac");

Reviewer: you should never call CracImpl directly. Use CracFactory.findDefault() instead

```

Once created, the CRAC can be filled sequentially (some data must be provided before others for logical reasons).

### Create contingencies

The first data to provide are the [contingencies](/docs/input-data/crac/json#contingencies), i.e. the incidents that can
occur on the network. Each contingency will be simulated during the optimisation to ensure that there is a set of
remedial actions that can solve constraints introduced by the contingency.

A contingency can be added to the CRAC using the `newContingency` adder method. The identifier of the contingency must
be provided alongside the impacted network element(s).

> For our example, we only create one contingency corresponding to an outage on the line _FFR1AA1 FFR2AA1_.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```java
```

crac.newContingency()
        .withId("contingency")
        .withNetworkElement("FFR1AA1  FFR2AA1")
        .add();
```

### Add instants

Once the contingencies are added, we can now create the different [instants](/docs/input-data/crac/json#instants-states)
of the optimisation process. An instant is added thanks to the `newInstant` method. Both an identifier and
an `InstantKind` (`PREVENTIVE`, `OUTAGE`, `AUTO` or `CURATIVE`) must be provided. The instants must also be declared in
**chronological order**.

> For our example, we will create 4 instants (one of each kind).

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```java
```

crac.newInstant("preventive", InstantKind.PREVENTIVE)
        .newInstant("outage", InstantKind.OUTAGE)

>         .newInstant("auto", InstantKind.AUTO)

Reviewer: AUTO is useless since you don't create an automaton

        .newInstant("curative", InstantKind.CURATIVE);
```

Now that contingencies and instants are all set, we can start adding CNECs and remedial actions to the CRAC.

### Create FlowCNECs

The next step is to create the [CNECs](/docs/input-data/crac/json#cnecs). For our example and given the simple network
we are using, we will only consider [FlowCNECs](/docs/input-data/crac/json#flow-cnecs) that correspond to lines in the
network that will have to be optimised flow-wise after contingencies (and in the base case).

The `newFlowCnec` method needs to be called to create a FlowCNEC in the CRAC. Different information must be provided
including the CNEC's identifier, network element, instant and thresholds. For non-preventive CNECs, an associated
contingency must also be provided.

> In our example, we define 3 FlowCNECs:
> - one at the preventive instant on line _FFR1AA1 FFR2AA1 1_
> - one at the auto instant on line _BBE2AA1 BBE3AA1 1_
> - one at the curative instant on line _BBE2AA1 BBE3AA1 1_

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```java
```

crac.newFlowCnec()
    .withId("FFR1AA1  FFR2AA1  1 - preventive")
    .withInstant("preventive")
    .withNetworkElement("FFR1AA1  FFR2AA1  1")
    .newThreshold()
        .withMin(-5000d)
        .withMax(+5000d)
        .withUnit(Unit.MEGAWATT)
        .withSide(Side.RIGHT)
        .add()
    .newThreshold()
        .withMin(-5000d)
        .withMax(+5000d)
        .withUnit(Unit.MEGAWATT)
        .withSide(Side.LEFT)
        .add()
    .add();

crac.newFlowCnec()
    .withId("BBE2AA1  BBE3AA1  1 - auto")
    .withInstant("auto")
    .withContingency("contingency")
    .withNetworkElement("BBE2AA1  BBE3AA1  1")
    .newThreshold()
        .withMin(-5000d)
        .withMax(+5000d)
        .withUnit(Unit.MEGAWATT)
        .withSide(Side.RIGHT)
        .add()
    .newThreshold()
        .withMin(-7500d)
        .withMax(+7500d)
        .withUnit(Unit.MEGAWATT)
        .withSide(Side.LEFT)
        .add()

>     .add();

Reviewer: add an outage CNEC.
increase the threshold on both sides so it resembles a real-life TATL (while preventive and curative would be PATLs)

if running the RAO in DC mode (would be easier to understand for the tutorial), set threshold on one side only

    .withInstant("curative")
    .withContingency("contingency")
    .withNetworkElement("BBE2AA1  BBE3AA1  1")
    .newThreshold()
        .withMin(-5000d)
        .withMax(+5000d)
        .withUnit(Unit.MEGAWATT)
        .withSide(Side.RIGHT)
        .add()
    .newThreshold()
        .withMin(-5000d)
        .withMax(+5000d)
        .withUnit(Unit.MEGAWATT)
        .withSide(Side.LEFT)
        .add()
    .add();
```

Finally, we can add remedial actions in the CRAC.

### Create a preventive and a curative PST range action

Let's start with [PST range actions](/docs/input-data/crac/json#range-actions). The network has one PST (_BBE2AA1
BBE3AA1 1_) that we can use to define these range actions. A PST range action can be added to the CRAC with
the `newPstRangeAction` method. The identifier of the remedial action, the network element it is acting on and the tap
range can be provided directly. For the initial tap and the tap-to-angle conversion map, it is easier to rely on
an `IidmPstHelper` which fetches the information in the network.

The usage rules must also be added to tell the RAO in which context the remedial can or must be applied.

> > For our example, let us create to usage rules:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> For our example, let us create two usage rules:
```

> - one _onInstant_ usage rule at the preventive instant making the PST range action available in the preventive instant
> - one _onContingencyState_ usage rule for the already defined contingency to make the PST range action available after
    said contingency occurred on the network

> ```
> IidmPstHelper iidmPstHelper = new IidmPstHelper("BBE2AA1  BBE3AA1  1",network);
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```java
IidmPstHelper iidmPstHelper = new IidmPstHelper("BBE2AA1  BBE3AA1  1", network);

```

        .withInstant("curative")
        .withContingency("contingency")
        .withUsageMethod(UsageMethod.AVAILABLE)
        .add()
    .add();
```

### Create an auto topological action

We can finish by adding a topological action to the CRAC, using the `newNetworkAction` method and
the `newTopologicalAction` adder, and providing an action type (i.e. open or close) and a line on which apply this
action. For illustrative purposes, let us make an auto remedial action from this remedial action. To do so, an
_onContingencyState_ usage rule at the _auto_ instant must be defined with a _FORCED_ usage method.

```
crac.newNetworkAction()
        .withId("topological-action")
        .newTopologicalAction()
            .withNetworkElement("FFR1AA1  FFR2AA1  1")
            .withActionType(ActionType.OPEN)
            .add()
        .newOnContingencyStateUsageRule()
            .withInstant("auto")
            .withContingency("contingency")
            .withUsageMethod(UsageMethod.FORCED)
            .add()
        .add();
```

We are almost there! The CRAC is complete and the RAO is almost ready to run. Let us see how to do this in the following
section.

## Run the RAO

> A last pre-processing step is required to run the RAO. The network and the CRAC must be processed together as
> a `RaoInput`. This is achieved through a `RaoInputBuilder`.

Reviewer: there's no real processing here. simplify
```suggestion
The network and the CRAC must be assembled together as a `RaoInput`. This is achieved through a `RaoInputBuilder`.
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```java
```

RaoInput.RaoInputBuilder raoInputBuilder = RaoInput.build(network,crac);
```

To run, the RAO also requires `RaoParameters` to properly set its desired behaviour. For our example, the default

> parameters will be fully sufficient.

Reviewer: add a sentence with a link to the parameters page "See how you can tune the RAO using the parameters here"

Thus, using both our `RaoInputBuilder` and the default parameters, we can run the RAO and store the optimisation results
in a [`RaoResult`](/docs/output-data/rao-result-json) object for further use or data export.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```java
```

> RaoResult raoResult = Rao.find().run(raoInputBuilder.build(), new RaoParameters());

Reviewer: does the produce interesting results ? 
summarize them in a few sentences (activates RAs, margins, etc)

```

> ## Summary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Full example
```

                .withMinTap(-5)
                .withMaxTap(10)
                .withRangeType(RangeType.ABSOLUTE)
                .add()
                .newOnInstantUsageRule()
                .withInstant("preventive")
                .withUsageMethod(UsageMethod.AVAILABLE)
                .add()
                .newOnContingencyStateUsageRule()
                .withInstant("curative")
                .withContingency("contingency")
                .withUsageMethod(UsageMethod.AVAILABLE)
                .add()
                .add();

        // Add auto topological action
        crac.newNetworkAction()
                .withId("topological-action")
                .newTopologicalAction()
                .withNetworkElement("FFR1AA1  FFR2AA1  1")
                .withActionType(ActionType.OPEN)
                .add()
                .newOnContingencyStateUsageRule()
                .withInstant("auto")
                .withContingency("contingency")
                .withUsageMethod(UsageMethod.FORCED)
                .add()
                .add();

        // Run RAO and retrieve raoResult
        RaoInput.RaoInputBuilder raoInputBuilder = RaoInput.build(network, crac);

>         RaoResult raoResult = Rao.find().run(raoInputBuilder.build(), new RaoParameters());

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        RaoResult raoResult = Rao.find("SearchTreeRao").run(raoInputBuilder.build(), new RaoParameters());
```

    }
}
```

## Conclusion

> Congratulations! You know now how to run a RAO by defining the CRAC using the Java API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Congratulations! You now know how to run a simple RAO.
```

increases the flow margin on line _NNL2AA1 BBE3AA1 1_ up to 8.15 MW (i.e. reduces the flow to 402 MW). The preventive
perimeter is thus secured. The network with the preventive remedial action applied is displayed below.

![](/assets/img/tutorial/preventive.svg)

## Loss of line

The outage is then simulated: line _NNL3AA1 DDE2AA1 1_ is lost. The network's topology is modified and the new flow is
now of 1000 MW (the whole production power) on line _NNL2AA1 BBE3AA1 1_.

![](/assets/img/tutorial/outage.svg)

However, the line's TATL is exactly 1000 MW so the network is temporarily secure. Note that this result is coherent with
the most limiting element displayed at the end of the preventive perimeter logs:

```
Limiting element #01: margin = 0.00 MW, element NNL2AA1  BBE3AA1  1 at state contingency - outage, CNEC ID = "NNL2AA1  BBE3AA1  1 - outage"
```

Indeed, the flow on line _NNL2AA1 BBE3AA1 1_ is equal to the TATL which is equivalent to a null margin. As the TATL can
only hold for a limited period of time, curative remedial actions must be applied to bring back the flow under the PATL.

## Curative optimisation

> The RAO will now try to apply the curative remedial action we defined in the CRAC to bring back the flow on line
> _NNL2AA1 BBE3AA1 1_ under the 410 MW PATL. As a reminder, this curative remedial action is a topological action
> consisting in closing lines _NNL2AA1 BBE3AA1 2_ and _NNL2AA1 BBE3AA1 3_ which are both parallel to _NNL2AA1 BBE3AA1 1_
> in order to divide the flow in three. It is expected that the remedial action will solve the current problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The RAO will now try applying the curative remedial action we defined in the CRAC, to bring the flow on line
_NNL2AA1 BBE3AA1 1_ back under the 410 MW PATL. As a reminder, this curative remedial action is a topological action
that closes lines _NNL2AA1 BBE3AA1 2_ and _NNL2AA1 BBE3AA1 3_, which are both parallel to _NNL2AA1 BBE3AA1 1_,
thus dividing the flow in three. It is expected that the remedial action can solve the current problem.
```
